# datavis_d3.js

## Data Vis using d3.js and HTML - Visualising Google Trends for 2020 Presidential Candidates

### Description
I decided to create a data visual in relation to the race leading up to the 2020 US Presidential Elections. As of today, there are 21 elected officials and notable public figures (19 Democrats, 2 Republicans) who have filed to run for president with the FEC. Historically, research studies published have indicated that there is a correlation between the volume of google search and the election result. With my personal interest vested in this area, I wanted to produce a visual that could help track the popularity of these candidates in anticipation of not just the 2020 elections but also for the party nominations. I analyzed Google’s search data to display the interest of the American voters on the candidates running for presidency.
I particularly chose to focus on some of the top 8 democratic candidates and 1 republican candidate - the current incumbent President Donald trump so as to draw comparisons as to how the democratic candidates are trending compared to him. I wanted to answer certain questions through my visual -
Which are the topics that arouse the most interest for each of the candidates? How can the searches related to the presidential candidates compare? What are tendencies over time? How do events impact popularity of candidates? This visual is an attempt to answer these questions and gain insights into what interests Americans about their candidates.

### Data Source 
Google Trends analyzes a random sample of searches using Google's search engine in a specific time period and indexes them from 0 to 100, where 100 is the most searched interest. All the other values are set in comparison to the most searched. This data is available for every topic and can be downloaded from their site in form of csv dumps. It is quite structured.

### Process
During the phase of data and concept explorations, I thought a lot about what I would want to explore through visualizing this data. What are the most interesting perspectives, juxtapositions, and relations that can be explored through this data? And what structure would allow me to experience those effortlessly? 
I think beyond just looking at the popularity of the candidates, I also wanted to give more context to the rise or lows in the popularity. After a lot of contemplation and iterations, I decided to structure the data in a time series format with popularity scores for each candidate and weekly top searched terms for each candidate as well, that would provide context to the popularity scores/indices.
I decided to represent my data using a stacked area chart. The area at a given time would represent the magnitude of popularity which I thought was crucial for comparison. However, there is some value lost in doing this sort of a chart as the raw popularity scores changed due to a stacked structure. To correct this, I populated the tooltip for every candidate with the raw value (0 to 100) so when the user hovers over a candidate, he/she would be able to quantify the popularity and compare it across the historical values for a candidate while the area would enable him to compare the candidates popularity to others.

### Challenges and Limitations 
I think overall there are a lot of limitation to drawing hard conclusions from this data. I think this data yields interesting trends and answers some general questions about the popularity of candidates but is quite limiting. For starters, popularity can be negative or positive and this data is not indicative of the type of popularity a candidate has. While research studies have suggested that google trends have been fairly predictive at forecasting election results and polling dynamics, one has to be careful when drawing conclusions from the raw data. This is why I decided to couple the popularity scores with the search terms in order to provide more context to the surge in interest levels. For example – we see a surge in the popularity score for Joe Biden when the Lucy Flores Scandal broke out. That surge is equivalent to some other candidates announcing their presidential bid. However, this wasn’t a favorable rise in popularity for Biden. Hence, I think that coupling search terms or topics in conjunction with the popularity is an important measure. I think the visual in the current state does not paint a whole picture of the 2020 run up as it only evaluates 9 candidates relative to each other. I think I was limited in my technical abilities to effectively collect data and visualize data for more than 10 candidates which is why I chose to stick with the top 9 candidates. Initially when I started this project, I also wanted to visualize the popularity state wise, towards the end of the project I decided to not proceed with that idea since I found it was overcomplicating my code. I think the data has so many interesting aspects to it, but I personally found it quite tough to represent everything in conjunction with one another through 1 big visual or through various small and different visuals giving my capabilities and the time. The data is time series in nature and I couldn’t think of too many innovative ways to present hat data keeping time as an important dimension, I mostly kept going back and forth between line charts, stream graph and area charts. I also wanted to present the top search terms through a word cloud but couldn’t get my code to produce that in an esthetically pleasing manner. I think overall for me, the major challenge during conceptualization and execution was to bring various aspects of the data together and tie them in one visual. I kept going back and forth between various ideas and went through a lot of iterations on D3 as well as pen and paper to finalize my visual. One of my biggest realizations personally was that its hard to exactly replicate what one draws on pen-paper so I think flexibility is an important aspect to ideating when thinking of a visual. 

### Interpretation of the visual 
I was quite impressed by the trends the visual yielded. I think the visual does a fair job of answering main questions like what do Americans google about their candidates or how is the popularity changing and what impacts it. I think beyond that the visual does a fine job of illustrating or identifying certain things concerning Americans regarding their candidates – like age in the case of Elizabeth Warren or questions surrounding Kamala Harris’s ethnicity. It also outlined how people think about their candidates, eg – Andrew Yang’s popularity is dominated by users googling about his policies and his 2020 campaign as opposed to Cory booker whose google searches revolve mostly around his sexuality and dating life. The trends also aligned well with some of the early polling results. As time progresses and we inch closer towards the democratic debates and other events, it will be interesting to see if google trends continue to align well with the polling numbers. We see spikes in the popularity index of the candidates especially around the time they announce their bid for Presidency such as with Bernie Sanders (2/19), Beto O’ Rourke (3/14), Pete Buttigieg (4/14). It is especially interesting to see that post the bid; some candidates like Pete Buttigieg are able to maintain their momentum vs candidates like Beto O’ Rourke who aren’t able to carry forward that momentum. 
